Parts of speech are categories of words like nouns, verbs, adjectives, and so on.
Parts of speech are obviously a major part of understanding the structure and use of language, and
therefore parts of speech, is also a major part of trying to understand how computers process natural
language and mechanistic interpretability of language models.
Now, you have already seen a few ways in this course of incorporating parts of speech into model investigations,
but a lot of the methods that I showed so far were either looking at single words with no context,
or fairly small data sets that were specifically crafted for the particular analysis.
Now, the problem with that approach, like the sentences with him and her and round, is that they.
The sentences are fairly short and a little contrived, so they don't really have a large context window
of relevancy.
And it's also difficult to scale up data sets like that.
You know, it's one thing to come up with like 50 sentences, but it's just not feasible to have thousands
of handcrafted sentences with a particular part of speech in a particular token position that are coded
or at least supervised by a human anyway.
Obviously, the solution is to use some other routines or libraries that can categorize words into parts
of speech.
Now, one of those libraries that is fairly often used is called spacy.
It's a fairly big and versatile library.
It does a lot of stuff.
And in this video I will introduce you to just the basic usage of this library for identifying parts
of speech in written text.
Unfortunately, it can be a little tricky to integrate this spacy library with the Tokenizers.
I will show you some of the issues that tend to arise, and then I'll discuss a few alternatives.
And then in the code challenge in the next video, you will continue exploring some solutions that aren't
really perfect, but at least are pretty good and easy to implement.
In terms of integrating the Spacy library tokenizer with the GPT tokenizer.
Anyway, here is a screenshot of the website for this library.
You can find it on the web just by searching, and I've also put a direct link to the website in the
code file in the Python demo.
And yeah, actually all of this stuff I've already mentioned.
Basically, I'm just going to show you one application of this library here in this video.
Fortunately, Google Colab already has this library installed, so we just need to import it.
Then here I am loading up this uh, module which is trained based on web text, and then I'll show you
a bunch of properties associated with this class object.
And then here I have a little sentence that we can work with to help demo this library.
So the sentence is, this is a very happy sentence that I will use to explore the Spacy library.
So here what I have done is manually split the words, uh, split the text into words, and then looked
up the part of speech for each word individually.
Now that's fine, although it's not actually the best way to use this library.
And that's because the Spacy library actually determines the part of speech, in part based on the context.
So the words surrounding each word.
So it is actually better to tokenize the entire sentence instead of splitting the sentence into words,
and then trying to extract the part of speech from each individual word.
For example, here you can see that when I used this approach, the word explore was mislabeled as a
noun.
But here, when I inputted the entire sentence into the NLP class object instead of just one word at
a time.
Now it correctly used the context to identify this word explore as a verb.
On the other hand, the spacey tokenizer does not correspond to LLM Tokenizers.
And so if we actually want to work with language models, then we need to tokenize according to the
model's tokenizer.
That will create some confusions, maybe some headaches, or at least some annoyances because the tokenizers
are different from the spacey tokenizer.
For one thing, LLM tokenizers are based on the byte pair encoding algorithm.
So that means they will often get subwords instead of full words.
Here you can see one example of how this can go wrong.
So here I used the GPT two tokenizer.
And now most of these tokens were actually categorized as space by the Spacy library utility.
Now this specific issue is actually really easy to solve simply by removing all of the preceding spaces,
but there are other incompatibilities between the different tokenizers.
For example, that arise when dealing with subwords.
So I'll show you some more demos of how this can be annoying when I switch to code, and then I'll discuss
a few strategies and then yeah, as I mentioned in the code challenge, in the next video, you will
discover one way of dealing with this incompatibility.
It's not perfect, but it is pretty good.
Okay, let's switch to code and have a look.
Here is the URL for this library so we don't need to install it.
It's already installed in Google Colab so we can just import it.
And yeah here I'm showing you all of the properties that are associated with this instance of this class.
I am not going to introduce you to most of these properties and options and all these things that are
available, but just to show you that there is.
There are many things that you can do with this library.
And yeah, what we are going to do is fairly simple, just extracting parts of speech.
Okay, so here I am splitting up the text into words.
This you've seen before.
And I can show it to you again really quickly.
Basically this is just creating a list where each element in the list is a space separated string of
characters from this, from the original sentence.
Okay.
And then I am defining.
So inputting that into this object NLP and then getting from that.
So this will tokenize it.
And then because it's just one word, there's also just going to be one token associated with the output
of this NLP object.
And that's why I'm indexing the zeroth element.
That's just getting the first token in here okay.
And then once we have that individual token we can write dot That is a method that returns the part
of speech.
So pronoun, pronoun, adjective and so on.
Okay.
And again yeah.
So this is kind of awkward.
The thing is that several like lots of words can be nouns or verbs, depending on how they're used in
context.
And when I only apply this method to one word at a time, there is no context.
And so we are not guaranteed to get the what would be the contextually correct answer.
So then what I do over here is I push the entire sentence so I'm not tokenizing or splitting the sentence
into separate words.
I'm just inputting the entire text into this NLP instance, this object here.
And then it will actually, you know, the output of this is actually a tokenized piece of text.
And now we get a more accurate answer, because this is actually the way that the Spacy library was
designed to process text, to take in all the text at once.
Okay, so now I'm going to import the GPT two tokenizer and tokenize that same piece of text.
And now I'm going to try to extract the part of speech from each individual token.
And as I discussed in the slides a moment ago, a tricky thing about this is that the GPT tokenizer
is based on subwords.
Yeah.
And so you see that this is this is really tripping up the Spacy library.
Basically every token that begins with a space is labeled as space.
So that is and then we get this other weird stuff here as well.
So the word spacy, the name of the library spacy, got separated into two tokens by the GPT tokenizer.
So space SP and then AC, and it labeled this one as space and AC an adjective.
But really it should be a noun, right?
This should be one or this is one word and that's a noun.
So in some sense we can fix this fairly easily simply by adding dot strip to this token text.
And all that is going to do is remove the preceding space.
So that certainly helps.
But that doesn't deal with the problem that we've still completely lost the context.
So now this spacy library still doesn't see any of the context.
So this is something that you should do.
Uh, but uh yeah, there's there's going to be some additional considerations that I will mention,
uh, after I finish the code demo.
And then we will implement in the code challenge in the next video.
Okay.
So then what I'd like to do just for fun is, uh, import a GPT two small model, and then I'm going
to generate some text.
So I'm seeding the text here with the phrase I think the world could be better if.
And so this I input into the model and then ask the model to generate another 400 tokens.
And we will see what GPT two thinks that we should do to make the world a better place.
I think the world could be a better place if we have more women in finance, he added.
Okay, so then this goes on.
It's getting into stuff about Iran and I'm not going to get too much into that.
But anyway, uh, so it always makes for interesting reading.
Uh, GPT two's generation.
Okay, so now the last thing that I'm doing here is looping over all of this text here that the model
generated.
And for each of the tokens, I am simply decoding that token, replacing the space with emptiness,
with nothingness And, uh, yeah, there's no special reason why I'm using this method instead of dot
strip here.
I think I wanted to just show some alternatives.
And I guess one thing is that strip will only remove the space in the beginning of the, uh, character
string character list, whereas this will get rid of any spaces anywhere in the text and then identify
that, uh, tokens part of speech.
And then here I say, if this is a noun, then I increment the noun counter and I print it out.
And if it's a verb, then I increment the verb counter and print that out.
This is a simplified version of what you are going to do in the next video, in the code challenge.
In the next video, basically what you are going to do is loop through a lot of text from a book and
identify nouns and adjectives, and you're going to use code that is a little bit more sophisticated
than this, but this is code that you can use to help you get started in the next, uh, code challenge
in the next video.
Okay.
So, uh, yeah, this is just looping through all of this text here.
And wherever it finds a verb or a noun, it prints that out.
So, yeah, you can go through this.
You can see mostly it's going to work really well.
The Spacy library does work quite well, even with these kind of weird headaches and annoyances that
I've introduced.
Here's a case where it's not working well.
I don't know what the S is for.
I guess you could, uh, go back and figure, oh, that's us, I think.
Yeah.
So anyway, sometimes it gives some weird results.
Mostly it's fine.
Uh, yeah.
And then here, let me scroll down.
Uh, this.
I was just curious to see how many nouns and verbs there are.
Of course, this number.
This count changes each time you rerun this code.
There are a few options for using Spacy with mechanistic interpretability.
First of all, I should say that if it's possible, then you should just stick with Spacy's internal
tokenizer for its part of speech categorization.
That will give you maximal accuracy, but it's not always possible because if you need to identify specific
tokens, then yeah, it's just not necessarily going to work.
You will see also in the beginning of the next code challenge, that there can be mismatches between
spacy's tokenization and GPT two tokenization.
One thing you can do is only use tokens that are full words in the model's tokenizer.
And yeah, that's also what I'm going to recommend in the next video.
That's a pretty good method, although it's not guaranteed to be a perfect solution, and so it's likely
that you will be excluding a lot of otherwise valid tokens, and it also means that there might still
be some mistakes that are introducing some non-systematic errors into the analysis.
And for that reason, is good to have a pretty large text dataset so that you can afford to filter out
a lot of uncertain matches, and also so that the errors have a minimal impact on the statistical analyses.
Last thing I want to mention here is that if you are really interested in using the Spacy library,
in practice, in applications or in research, then I recommend looking into it in a little bit more
detail than just what I presented here.
So you can explore what other utilities they have available.
So that's it for this video.
You will continue exploring this library for part of speech identification in the next video.